# AJAX Solr

AJAX Solr is a JavaScript library for creating user interfaces to
[Apache Solr][9].

It is JavaScript framework-agnostic, but requires an AJAX implementation to
communication with Solr. As such, you may use the library whether you develop
using jQuery, MooTools, Prototype, Dojo, or any other framework. You need only
define a Manager object that extends the provided AbstractManager object, and
define the function executeRequest() on that object. A jQuery-compatible Manager
is provided at widgets/managers/Manager.jquery.js.

AJAX Solr began as a fork of [SolrJS][1] by Matthias Epheser. We are indebted to
that project for providing a great starting point for improvement.

## Advantages over SolrJS

[SolrJS][1] is ["a JavaScript client library that was initially developed as a
2008 Google Summer of Code project"][2]. However, it is nearly inactive,
averaging one commit per month for the past year. This would be acceptable if
the library were mature and bug-free, but it isn't yet.

### More efficient

SolrJS executes an AJAX request for each of its widgets. This is inefficient, as
you may have many widgets for faceting on date, language, location, price,
category, etc. and at least one widget for displaying results. AJAX Solr
performs a single AJAX request. It can do this, because Solr can retrieve the
result set and the data for each facet in a single query. AJAX Solr takes
advantage of this feature; SolrJS doesn't.

### Better browser support

AJAX Solr supports the back button and bookmarking (using the fragment
identifier). You can add a filter or change your query, and click the back
button to undo your changes. If you want to save your filtered result set, you
just need to bookmark the page. SolrJS doesn't do either.

As of writing, [SolrJS][3] is still not IE 6, IE 7, and IE 8-compatible. AJAX
Solr is.

### More secure

SolrJS requires that your Solr instance be publicly accessible. AJAX Solr was
built under the assumption that you may want to proxy requests to your Solr
instance, e.g. to limit what information the user has access to. AJAX Solr gives
you the option.

### More Solr features

SolrJS doesn't provide support for Solr's [highlighting][4] or sorting
parameters. AJAX Solr does.

### API improvements

SolrJS's functions for selecting/unselecting filters require that you pass in
the full list of selected filters. AJAX Solr's functions just require that you
pass in the list of filters that you want to add or remove from the list of
selected filters. In other words, with AJAX Solr, you don't need to know the
state of the current list of selected filters; you just add/remove what you
want.

AJAX Solr's manager adds useful functions, such as: `deselectWidget`, to
deselect all of a given widget's filters; `selectOnlyItems`, to deselect all
except the given filters; `selectOnlyWidget`, to deselect all except the given
widget's filters. Thanks to these and other improvements, your widgets will
never need access to the manager's or other widgets' private fields.

### More customizable

SolrJS defines a few hooks for modifying a widget's behaviour. AJAX Solr adds:
`afterChangeSelection`, which allows a widget to run some code if one of its
filters was set/unset; `startAnimation`/`endAnimation`, which allow you to
customize what happens while the AJAX request is being performed, e.g. replace
the result set with a loading spinner; `displayQuery`, which allows you to
display the current query, filters, sort, etc. to the user.

### Better isolation of logic from presentation

In the widgets we've written for AJAX Solr, we separate the HTML from the
JavaScript by putting all the HTML into "theme" functions using the
AjaxSolr.theme API call (inspired by Drupal). Examples will be provided on the
wiki shortly.

### Cleaner code

After working with SolrJS for a month, I can assure you AJAX Solr is <abbrev
title="Don't Repeat Yourself">DRY</abbrev>-er, more loosely coupled, and easier
to read than SolrJS. SolrJS's coupling between the manager and its widgets, for
example, is very tight. If you require detailed justification, contact
[james@evolvingweb.ca][5]. AJAX Solr's API is also more of a pleasure to work
with. Consider this example:

Inheritance in SolrJS:

    jQuery.solrjs.AbstractClientSideWidget = jQuery.solrjs.createClass ("AbstractWidget", {
      /* key/value pairs */
    });

Inheritance in AJAX Solr:

    AjaxSolr.AbstractFacetWidget = AjaxSolr.AbstractWidget.extend({
      /* key/value pairs */
    });

## How do I get started?

Read the documentation and explore the code for now. More examples and a demo
site are pending.

We have currently written widgets that use jQuery and integrate with Drupal.
Release pending.

Documentation is generated by [JsDoc Toolkit][8] with the command: `java -jar
jsrun.jar app/run.js -a -E="jquery.strftime.js" -p -r=3 -s -t=templates/jsdoc
/path/to/library/`

[1]: http://solrjs.solrstuff.org/
[2]: http://wiki.apache.org/solr/SolrJS "SolrJS Wiki"
[3]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SOLR-1294 "SolrJS issue tracker"
[4]: http://wiki.apache.org/solr/HighlightingParameters
[5]: mailto:james@evolvingweb.ca
[6]: http://wiki.apache.org/solr/CommonQueryParameters
[7]: http://evolvingweb.ca/
[8]: http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/
[9]: http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
